Gene expression changes in spinal motoneurons of the SOD1(G93A) transgenic model for 
ALS
 after treatment with G-CSF.
TDP-43 Proteinopathy and 
ALS
: Insights into Disease Mechanisms and Therapeutic Targets.
Putting 
ALS
 on ice.
Impaired Bone Homeostasis in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Mice with Muscle Atrophy.
Hospital admission rates by mode of patient arrival: a comparison between urban and suburban emergency departments.
Cumulative motor index: an index to study progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Pretreatment and Integrated Analysis of Spectral Data Reveal Seaweed Similarities Based on Chemical Diversity.
Adipose Tissue Derived Stem Cells in Neural Regenerative Medicine.
Clinical varieties and epidemiological aspects of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in the Caribbean island of Guadeloupe: A new focus of 
ALS
 associated with Parkinsonism.
Socioeconomic costs of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis according to staging system.
Associations of maternal BMI and gestational weight gain with neonatal adiposity in the Healthy Start study.
Whole-grain wheat consumption reduces inflammation in a randomized controlled trial on overweight and obese subjects with unhealthy dietary and lifestyle behaviors: role of polyphenols bound to cereal dietary fiber.
Stem cells for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis modeling and therapy: Myth or fact?
A novel spectral resolution and simultaneous determination of multicomponent mixture of Vitamins B1, B6, B12, Benfotiamine and Diclofenac in tablets and capsules by derivative and MCR-
ALS
.
Characterization of monoclonal gammopathy in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The expanding syndrome of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a clinical and molecular odyssey.
Detection of Cyanotoxins, β-N-methylamino-L-alanine and Microcystins, from a Lake Surrounded by Cases of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
Human-derived neural progenitors functionally replace astrocytes in adult mice.
Gamma-synuclein pathology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Characteristics of pain in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
