Alisertib induces cell cycle arrest and autophagy and suppresses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition involving PI3K/Akt/mTOR and sirtuin 1-mediated signaling pathways in human pancreatic cancer cells.
Measuring Neuromuscular Junction Functionality in the SOD1
G93A
 Animal Model of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
bFGF in the CSF and serum of sALS patients.
Deficits in Trabecular Bone Microarchitecture in Young Women with Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus.
Evidence of Hydrogen Sulphide involvement in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
Nerve ultrasound for differentiation between amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and multifocal motor neuropathy.
Up-regulation of neural and cell cycle-related microRNAs in brain of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mice at late disease stage.
ALS
-causative mutations in FUS/TLS confer gain and loss of function by altered association with SMN and U1-snRNP.
Alisertib, an Aurora kinase A inhibitor, induces apoptosis and autophagy but inhibits epithelial to mesenchymal transition in human epithelial ovarian cancer cells.
Prognostic factors in canine acute leukaemias: a retrospective study.
Elevation of plasma 1-deoxy-sphingolipids in type 2 diabetes mellitus: a susceptibility to neuropathy?
Living with 
ALS
.
[To screen for SQSTM1/p62 gene in Chinese patients with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis carrying superoxide dismutase 1 mutation].
Brain-Machine Interface (BMI) in paralysis.
Plant sterols: friend or foe in CNS disorders?
Two dimensional assisted liquid chromatography - a chemometric approach to improve accuracy and precision of quantitation in liquid chromatography using 2D separation, dual detectors, and multivariate curve resolution.
Modeling nonbilinear total synchronous fluorescence data matrices with a novel adapted partial least squares method.
An auditory multiclass brain-computer interface with natural stimuli: Usability evaluation with healthy participants and a motor impaired end user.
Inhibition effect of graphene oxide on the catalytic activity of acetylcholinesterase enzyme.
Homozygosity mapping in an Irish 
ALS
 case-control cohort describes local demographic phenomena and points towards potential recessive risk loci.
